# A thesis generator for Vanderbilt University

This repository provides an automated mechanism to generate all parts of
a thesis for submission to the Vanderbilt University Graduate School. It also
provides a means to generate draft documents of individual chapters in
a variety of formats for distribution to reviewers.

## Why

Despite how powerful and elegant LaTeX is, writing a thesis as a series of
`.tex` documents is cumbersome. Online tools like Overleaf simplify this
tremendously and provide useful features like collaborative editing. Vanderbilt
University even provides an [official Overleaf template][Vanderbilt-overleaf]
for writing graduate theses. These approaches still require you to write in
pure LaTeX syntax.

Pandoc allows you to convert many document types to LaTeX. This means you can
write in any format you want, using any editor you want, and convert your
document to LaTeX syntax for professional typesetting. Additionally, Pandoc
seamlessly handles the conversion of many image types, so if you include images
files in your source documents in `.svg` format, Pandoc will automatically
convert them to `.png`.

Applying special thesis formatting to files generated by Pandoc is possible,
but often requires many command-line options. Wrapping these `pandoc`
incantations in a single makefile allows for pain-free generation of target
files simply by using `make <target>` instead.

See the available [commands provided by this Makefile](#commands) below.

> If you haven't used Make before, learn more about [Reproducibility with
Make][turing], or view the basics on how you can use [markdown and makefiles to
automate publishing][markdown-and-makefiles].

[Vanderbilt-overleaf]: https://www.overleaf.com/latex/templates/vanderbilt-university-dissertation-template/fmqpcfjqtgyq
[turing]: https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/reproducible-research/make
[markdown-and-makefiles]: https://chrisman.github.io/3.html

## Requirements

- [Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/)
- [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/index.html) version >= 3.1.8
- [Pandoc-crossref](https://github.com/lierdakil/pandoc-crossref)
- [LaTeX distribution](https://www.latex-project.org) with pdf-engine: `xelatex`
- Shell with access to basic bash commands: `rm`, `touch`, `mkdir`.
    - Windows: Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL2)
    - MacOS: Terminal or similar

> The Pandoc version supplied by Ubuntu repositories frequently lags behind the
latest Pandoc release---sometimes by several years. If you are running WSL with
Ubunutu 22.04 LTS, consider installing Pandoc directly from source in your
Ubuntu environment. If you install Pandoc through Anaconda/Miniconda, opt for
the version from the conda-forge channel.

The following additional package is required if you want to make use of
native SVG conversion in your figures:

- rsvg-convert
 
> rsvg-convert is included in [Inkscape][inkscape] in MacOS, and
available as a standalone package on MacOS (`brew install librsvg`), Ubuntu
(`apt install librsvg2-bin`), or Windows (`choco install rsvg-convert`).

### Required files to edit

- Content in the `chapters/` directory
- An abstract in the `extras/` directory
- A YAML metadata file in the `extras/` directory with some required fields

> While the `make` recipes in this project should work on any standard input
> file, writing the source files in Pandoc markdown format allows for more
> seamless conversion to other output formats, like EPUB or HTML, which are more
> tablet-friendly formats.

Chapters are written in the `chapters/` directory and will be included in
name-sorted order, which means you can control the inserted order by using file
names `01-intro` and `02-experiment`.

The title page for the printed thesis is generated automatically from a fixed
template and relevant title words are extracted from user-defined metadata. In
particular, this project makes use of the following assumed metadata fields:

```yaml
title: "A title"
author: First Last
institute: Some University
degree: Doctor of Philosopy
major: Major
date: Month Day, Year
location: City, State
chair:
    name: First Last
    title: Ph.D.
committee:
  - name: First Last
    title: Ph.D.
  - name: First Last
    title: Ph.D.
  - name: First Last
    title: Ph.D.
  - name: First Last # Repeat only as necessary
    title: Ph.D.
```

### Extras

Bibliographies, additional user-defined metadata, and target-specific styling
parameters belong in the `extras/` directory.

The `extras/` directory is explicitly aware of a few file types and file names
(case-insensitive) during the Make process.

- Any file with the word `abstract` in the file name will be recognized as
  contents to be included in the required abstract. This file is expected to be
  content only; no special section markers are necessary, but stylized text is
  allowed.
- Any file with the words `copyright`, `dedication`, or `acknowledgment` in
  the file name will be automatically detected as front matter and included in
  the appropriate order during a full build.
- Any and all files with the words `appendix` in the file name will be
  automatically detected as an appendix entry and included in the name-sorted
  order after the bibliography. Each appendix should include its own top-level
  section header.
- Any and all files with `.yaml` or `.yml` extension will be treated as Pandoc
  metadata options and will be passed into Pandoc with the `--metadata-file`
  flag in name-sorted order.
- Any `.bib` file in the `extras/` directory will be automatically used by
  Pandoc during each of the build operations. Specifically, Pandoc will use the
  `--citeproc` filter to convert generalized Pandoc citations to
  target-specific syntax (i.e. `\cite{}` for LaTeX, `<div class=csl-entry>` for
  HTML).
- Any `.csl` file placed in the `extras/` directory will be automatically
  applied to the bibliography when using Pandoc
- Any and all `.css` file placed in the `extras/css/` directory will be applied
  to the HTML build process.
- Any and all files placed in the `extras/js` directory will be inserted verbatim
  into the header of each HTML file using the `--header-includes` Pandoc
  option.

In addition to the required fields outlined in the previous section that _must_
be specified, users can extend their preferences with additional Pandoc
metadata fields.

The following snippet placed into any YAML file adds a subtitle to the title
page, adjusts the line spacing of the main content with `linestretch`, adjusts
the settings to the LaTeX geometry package, and specifies some extra packages
and tweaks to be inserted in the preamble of a LaTeX document.

```yaml
subtitle: "An optional subtitle"
linestretch: 1.5
geometry:
  - layout=letterpaper
  - top=1in
  - bottom=1in
  - inner=1.5in
  - outer=1in
  - heightrounded
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{parskip}
  - \setlength{\parindent}{20pt}
  - \def\thechapter{\arabic{chapter}}
```

## Getting started

After cloning, forking, or downloading this repository to your preferred
location, your publishing process can be as simple as:

1. Create and edit the required files described above.

2. Open a terminal at the root of this cloned project.

```bash
cd path/to/thesis/
```

3. Generate your desired target

```bash
make thesis
```

> To explore a minimum working example of a thesis project, see this [example][example] branch on GitHub.
>
> If you cloned this repository:
>````bash
> git switch example
>````

[example]: https://www.github.com/davidcurie/thesis-generator/tree/example

### Updating

The templates in this repository may need to be updated from time to time,
either because of clarifications in the official Overleaf template provided by
the Vanderbilt University Graduate School, or because future versions of Pandoc
introduce newer features that are incompatible with existing templates.

#### Re-download

If you don't track your changes in Git, you can delete and re-download or
re-clone this repository.

Make a copy of your `extras/` and `chapters/` folders, re-download this entire
repository, and place your `extras/` and `chapters/` folders in the fresh
project.

#### Git pull

If you cloned this repository, navigate to this repository in a terminal that
has access to Git and run the following:

```bash
git pull
```

or the more verbose \[equivalent\] command:

```bash
git pull origin main
```

#### GitHub sync fork

If you forked this repository to your own GitHub account so that you could
track your own changes in Git, update your upstream reference with one of the
two methods below:

- Under the `Code` drop-down menu at the top of the repository on GitHub,
  select "Sync fork".

OR

- In your local terminal, run the following commands:

```bash
git fetch upstream
git merge upstream/main
```

> `git merge` can equivalently be replaced by `git rebase` if you have
a preference on your own local integration strategy.

## How it works

The `templates/` directory contains various Pandoc templates, Pandoc settings,
and LaTeX styles that are used to generate preconfigured LaTeX files necessary
for a complete build. These templates strive to follow published guidelines set
forth by the Vanderbilt University Graduate School and do not need to be
modified.

The `_tmp/` directory holds pre-compiled LaTeX pages for front matter that has
non-standard styling, such as the title page. If not present, this directory
will be created and populated at runtime. The construction of its files is
determined by the template files and from contents in the user-controlled
`extras/` directory. After a build is complete, the files in `_tmp/` may be
safely discarded; they will be generated again if needed.

During the build process, the intermediate contents of the `_tmp/` directory
and the source files in the `chapters/` and `extras/` directory are converted
and assembled with Pandoc all at once. The final output depends on the
arguments supplied to `make`, but all final files will end up in some subfolder
of a `_build/` directory. If not present, this directory will be created after
a `make <target>` command.

In general, `make <target>` will build a target directly from the intermediate
files. If the intermediate file responsible for the build does not yet exist,
it will be created from the source documents. The makefile knows about the
dependencies of intermediate files it creates, so if a change occurs to the
source file responsible for generating an intermediate file, the intermediate
file will first be updated before the target is rebuilt.

This project supplies some required options and safe defaults as metadata
options stored in the `templates/` directory. These are combined with the user
options defined in the `extras/` directory. In the case where competing
metadata entries are present across several additional files, the value from
the last-loaded file persists.

The makefile detects and loads metadata in the following order: `DEFAULTS`,
`USER`, `REQUIRED`. This order ensures users cannot accidentally override
strictly required styles. If multiple user metadata files are detected, they
are loaded in name-sorted order.

Due to the way dictionary merges are handled in Pandoc, metadata fields like
`geometry:` or `header-includes:` that accept an array of sub-options are
completely replaced by the presence of a new entry in a later file. This means
that partially supplied fields from multiple documents do not stack, even if
the subfields within that entry do not conflict.

See Pandoc's notes on [yaml metadata blocks][yaml-blocks] for more details.

[yaml-blocks]: https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#extension-yaml_metadata_block

## Commands

### Syntax

```bash
make <target>
```

where `<target>` is replaced by several options below.

### Generate a thesis

Generate a fully compiled thesis (title, optional front matter if present, main
content, bibliography, optional appendix if present) and a separate abstract
page formatted for submission to print.

```bash
make thesis
```

The results are stored under `_build/pandoc/thesis.pdf` and
`_build/pandoc/thesis_abstract.pdf`.

### Generate review documents

If you wish to share copies of your source documents with your reviewers, you
can convert each source document to a target format specified below. The file
names of each source document will be preserved in the output target.

Make a PDF of each chapter:

```bash
make pdf
```

Make a draft PDF of each chapter:

```bash
make draft
```

A draft is a PDF document with explicit line numbers displayed in the margins
for easier referencing.

Make a responsive HTML page of each chapter:

```bash
make html
```

Make a Word document of each chapter:

```bash
make docs
```

Make a composite Word document of all assembled chapters:

```bash
make doc
```

## File maintenance

Generate a thesis, abstract, and a review document of each chapter in all
target formats:

```bash
make all
```

Remove all target build files:

```bash
make clean
```

Removing all build files will trigger a rebuild of any target from the contents
in the `_tmp/` directory on the next invocation of `make`.

Remove all target build files and intermediate files:

```bash
make purge
```

## Advanced use

If you prefer manual tweaks to your LaTeX source documents and can't figure out
how to achieve it through Pandoc or the Makefile, you can trigger the
generation of intermediate LaTeX files in the temporary directory.

### Regenerate automatically detected dependencies

> Note that these intermediate files may already be generated from `make`
commands, but it may be helpful to manually trigger these builds if your
expected `make <taget>` command has runtime errors.

For any front matter or appendix file that is dynamically built, you can run
the following to see the LaTeX source generated behind the scenes, assuming you
have the appropriate prerequisite source file:

```bash
make _tmp/abstract.tex
```

Available targets: `_tmp/title.tex`, `_tmp/copyright.tex`,
`_tmp/dedication.tex`, `_tmp/acknowledgments.tex`, `_tmp/appendix.tex` `_tmp/abstract.tex`

Any edits you make to these raw files will trigger a rebuild of any target that
depends on them the next time you run make on that target[^dependencies]. This means you can
edit the abstract page if you don't like a setting automatically generated from
the template, and then re-run `make abstract` to regenerate the abstract with
your modified `_tmp/abstract.tex` source.

[^dependencies]: Builds are triggered whenever a dependency is newer than
    a target. The dependency hierarchy goes from source -> intermediate -> target.
    If you ask for a target with `make target` after editing a source file, the
    intermediate file will be updated before target is built. If a source file
    remains untouched and an intermediate file is adjusted, the intermediate file
    will not be regenerated, but the target will recognize the updated intermediate
    file and trigger a rebuild.

If you are making the same tweaks often, you can edit the appropriate template
file to your liking, but beware that these changes may be destroyed if you
re-sync your repository to this one on GitHub.

### Edit a LaTeX version of a thesis

Because the Pandoc process handles conversion and assembly of the source
documents in one streamlined process during `make thesis`, there is no
intermediate `main.tex` file that you can edit to control explicit thesis
formatting.

You can force the generation of the intermediate LaTeX document produced by
Pandoc with the following command:

```bash
make latex
```

This option inserts all source documents in their converted LaTeX form into one
document, `_tmp/pandoc.tex` according to the minimally modified default Pandoc
LaTeX template in `templates/pandoc.tex`. The make process then runs `pdflatex`
and `bibtex` in a defined sequence more akin to the _MikTex_ or _TexShop_
programs on Windows or Mac. The result is a PDF file stored in the
`_build/latex` directory, but the auxiliary files are explicitly preserved in
`_tmp/`. From here, you can edit `_tmp/pandoc.tex` and re-run `make latex` to
update the generated PDF.

The net results of `make latex` and `make thesis` are not identical because
many of the Pandoc run-time options expire upon generation of the
intermediate `.tex` file, at which point the compilation responsibility is
handed off to another program that is not Pandoc. The most crucial change is
that in order to run `bibtex` on the intermediate `pandoc.tex` file, the `make
latex` build process has to substitute the `--citeproc` filter for the
`--natbib` filter. The undesired consequence of this is that Pandoc no longer
handles the styling of the bibliography according to your supplied `.csl` file
or metadata options.

To fix this, you will likely need to edit the bibliography section in your
intermediate `_tmp/pandoc.tex` file and adjust the style to your liking.

> Be mindful that if you edit the source documents in `chapters/`, any metadata
file in `extras/`, or any dependent front matter or appendix files in `_tmp/`,
the `_tmp/pandoc.tex` file will be rebuilt. If you find yourself making
frequent adjustments to `_tmp/pandoc.tex`, you can edit `templates/pandoc.tex`.
Saving edits to this file will also trigger a rebuild of `_tmp/pandoc.tex` on
the next invocation of `make latex`.

In a similar fashion, you can generate an intermediate LaTeX thesis file more
exactly aligned to the official Vanderbilt University Overleaf template
published in 2021. This uses a heavily modified Pandoc template with all but
a limited number of Pandoc options explicitly disabled. In particular, it fills
in the `hyperref` PDF attributes from the `title:` and `author:` metadata,
inserts any `header-includes:` statements in the preamble, and checks if any
optional front matter or appendix files are present in the `extras/` directory
and automatically inserts them into their appropriate location in the LaTeX
file.

```bash
make overleaf
```

As before, this relies on `pdflatex` and `bibtex` under the hood, so the same
problems outlined in `make latex` apply here. The intermediate files in `_tmp/`
will have `overleaf` in their name, and the final PDF will be placed in
`_build/overleaf/`. After editing `_tmp/overleaf.tex`, you can run `make
overleaf` again to update the generated PDF.

> Also as before, `_tmp/overleaf.tex` will be rebuilt on any changes to the
source files in `chapters/` or any metadata file in `extras/`. If you find
yourself making frequent adjustments to `_tmp/overleaf.tex`, you can edit
`templates/overleaf.tex`. Saving edits to this file will also trigger a rebuild
of `_tmp/overleaf.tex`. Be mindful that your changes to
`templates/overleaf.tex` may be overwritten if you re-sync your repository.

In addition to the bibliography differences that are described for the `make
latex` process, the additional difference in output format between `make
thesis` and `make overleaf` is that the Overleaf version uses the `article`
document class, whereas the default Pandoc build uses the `book` document
class. If you want to print a one-sided document like in the article
class, you can supply the following option in any user-defined metadata files:

```yaml
classoption: oneside
```

#### Notes on vector images

Both the `_tmp/overleaf.tex` and the `_tmp/pandoc.tex` intermediate files
include the CTAN package `svg` to handle `.svg` graphics, but their format is
first rendered to a `.pdf` and `.pdf_tex` through [Inkscape][inkscape]. For the
`pdflatex` process to complete without errors, you need to have `inkscape`
accessible from the _PATH_ of your terminal. Linux and MacOS users who install
Inkscape will have this automatically configured, but Windows users may need to
do more. See [this post][svg-package] for more background. The key difference
in result between `make thesis` and either `make latex` or `make overleaf` is
that available text fields from any `.svg` figure will be rendered by LaTeX
instead of their fonts as specified in the source file.

[inkscape]: https://inkscape.org
[svg-package]: https://tex.stackexchange.com/a/523685

#### Notes on explicit LaTeX builds

Both the `_tmp/overleaf.tex` and `_tmp/pandoc.tex` file will be similar to what
you would use directly on Overleaf or in a LaTeX software suite except that the
paths of the input files and graphics path are specified as relative paths from
the root directory of this project. In Overleaf, you might normally keep your
`main.tex` file in the project root and specify figures and other input paths
relative to the source document. In this project, the source document is placed
in the intermediate directory. This means you cannot run `pdflatex` from the
`_tmp/` directory and expect things to work as normal.

If you want to migrate the results of this build process to your preferred
LaTeX suite, the following checklist may be helpful:

- [ ] Copy all contents of `_tmp/` to a new directory of your choice (e.g.
  `MyThesis/`)
- [ ] Copy all figures from this project to a directory of your choice (e.g.
  `MyThesis/Figures/`)
- [ ] Copy the bibliography and any style sheets to a directory of your choice
  (e.g. `MyThesis/`)
 - [ ] Update the graphics path in `overleaf.tex` to point to your figures
   directory _relative to `overleaf.tex`_ (e.g. `\graphicspath{{Figures}}`)
 - [ ] Adjust the input path in `overleaf.tex` for any additional files to be
   referenced relative to `overleaf.tex` (e.g. adjust `\input(_tmp/title)` to
   `\input(title)`)
 - [ ] Ensure the name and location of the bibliography in `overleaf.tex` is
   specified relative to `overleaf.tex`. (e.g. `\bibliography{MyBibliography}`)
- [ ] Compile your LaTeX document from the directory as you normally would
  (e.g. compile LaTeX -> run BibTeX -> compile LaTeX -> compile LaTeX)


### Summary of make targets

| Target     | Rebuilt on changes to    | Result in `_build/`                               | Engine   |
|------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|----------|
| `thesis`   | `chapters/*`, `extras/*` | `pandoc/thesis.pdf`, `pandoc/thesis_abstract.pdf` | pandoc   |
| `pdf`      | `chapters/*`             | `pdf/*.pdf`,                                      | pandoc   |
| `html`     | `chapters/*`             | `html/*.html`,                                    | pandoc   |
| `doc`      | `chapters/*`             | `doc/thesis.docx`,                                | pandoc   |
| `docs`     | `chapters/*`             | `doc/*.docx`,                                     | pandoc   |
| `draft`    | `chapters/*`             | `draft/*.pdf`,                                    | pandoc   |
| `latex`    | `_tmp/pandoc.tex`,       | `latex/thesis.pdf`                                | pdflatex |
| `abstract` | `_tmp/abstract.tex`      | `latex/thesis_abstract.pdf`                       | pdflatex |
| `overleaf` | `_tmp/overleaf.tex`      | `overleaf/thesis.pdf`                             | pdflatex |
